[Applause]
well thank you all it's a delight to be
here again Lov to see some familiar
faces and some new ones and our Our
Guest in conversation this evening is
sidat Muki uh who is a cancer physician
uh still sees patients uh you know keeps
his bedside manner brushed up uh and
also runs a lab looking at stem cells
both of these at columia University in
New York and and Sid is also WR as some
of you all know so his book The Emperor
of all maladies uh was on times's list
of 100 most important books ever written
uh so no pressure there and um uh won
the Pulitzer Prize and also as we were
discussing just earlier also won the
guardian first book prize which I think
is a is a good Accolade for a book prize
that crosses over between uh literature
uh and scientific and factual books so
we're delighted to have sidong and you
know we'll chat between us uh we hope
you'll pay attention for a little while
there'll be time for questions in the
second half um and it's not we're not
going to give you a tutorial there's no
whiteboard we haven't brought any
PowerPoint but I did think it was worth
at least to begin with if you don't mind
Sid reviewing some of the basic facts
about this stuff because you know just
to sort of level the playing field out
and I'm going to ask what I let me Begin
by asking you Ian Fleming or John lar
Ian
Fleming you're asking me Ian Fleming or
John carry I'm going to answer you
Johnna carry better on love uh in my
view and you inflaming very good so it
begins not sure which way the house went
on that one right so um you you in this
lovely book that you've uh written and
will be signing afterwards the Gene and
intimate history you talk about the gene
the atom and the bite as being with a Y
as being the the fundamental units uh
you know of of the Contemporary World
we'll leave uh bites and atoms aside for
the moment or I think we'll return to
both of them a little bit later um but
can I ask what I think is probably a
deceptively simple question s
uh can you just explain to us briefly
what a gene is would you mind if that's
not too we have an hour and a
half so you know a full description um
really merits longer than we have uh in
brief the gene is a unit of hereditary
information um that sounds rather
abstract let me put it in very Concrete
in a very concrete way it is the unit of
information that you transmit to your
children um I call it a unit because
it's indivisible you can't break it up
into smaller parts it is transmitted
whole generally speaking although it can
acquire it can be swapped around with
other with its sister genes Etc but
really it's transmitted whole to your to
your children and it determines some
aspect of your children's physiology or
appearance or fate or future um it there
are many many other things there are
many other properties of genes by which
they're defined but this for this
audience for this sort of discussion I
think that's where probably the the the
discussion should begin okay and a
couple of things about that definition
which I think already interesting we've
talked about the atom and the bite which
I said we wouldn't decompose and come
back to but we will immediately they
also have constituent parts and we'll be
talking about DNA and stuff like that
but but I wonder if you can just expand
briefly on this notion of it's being
indivisible I think that's the word you
used of it's being unary what do you
mean by a gene being un given that it's
made up of these letters and the codes
and things we'll talk about later right
so a gene as as many of us know is made
up of it's it has a chemical form it's
made up of a um string of um nucleotides
actg and if you were a gene if you were
to look at a gene or to read a gene it
would it would read like a g c c g g c c
t g g g g etc etc um if you take the
entire Human Genome actg Etc that would
be about three billion odd acgs okay in
the welcome collection there is a
printed out version of the human genome
isn't there with the little little
letters and it's exact many yeah volumes
if you look at that um it would be I
estimate around 66 full volumes of the
encyclopedia branica okay so one way you
could imagine it is that you're sitting
in this room and right up to the walls
every wall contains these 66 full sets
not volume 66 full sets of the
encyclopedia Botanica if you were to
pick out one of these encyclopedias you
would read act gcct g g g etc etc now
from that information is obviously
inscrutable to you and me for the most
part just letters just letters four
letters repeated over and over again
again and yet if you put those four
letters into an embryonic cell mhm in
the form of this chemical divided into
23 chromosomes that embryonic
cell astonishingly can build you and me
with our commonalities the fact that we
have one
nose and 10 fingers and our differences
the fact that you and I don't resemble
each other you like the car likeing
fundamentally fundamental division there
is a gene for that not
um um but but fundamental differences
between you and me and the variation
that we see in ourselves if you
change five letters 10 letters 25
letters some repeat somewhere in that 66
volume set of the encyclop 66 set of the
encyclopedia you could
fall become a victim to a deadly disease
like Huntington's disease if you had
another variation you could fall you
know you could fall prey to cystic
fibrosis I still want to press you
though on this what is a gene thing so
and I'm asking this as you know as a
humble neuroscientist therefore like
most of you not somebody who gets
genetics who understands this stuff so
here's the question I've got for you
when you're outside a domain it's
impossible to know which things inside
the domain are contested and which
things everyone agrees on yes so if I
lined up three geneticists would you all
agree on the definition of a gene and
that would be a dull question question
and you just want to move on to the
interesting stuff or is the question of
what a gene is the definition of a gene
is that still an interesting question
for you guys is it something that's
Dynamic that's changing over recent time
is it contested and the answer is that
um the answer is that they would Mo
three geneticists in the room would
agree largely on what a gene is okay
okay they would have some disagreement
about how things are evolving there new
information coming out of a gene that um
that is coming out over time so would
agree that it's a unit of heredity that
it specifies information specify it
specifies information about physiology
or Anatomy or some important
characteristic of of of information
biological
information a gene need not be a
continuous stretch of DNA in you know 50
years ago if you asked them well does a
gene need to be one long stretch of DNA
most people would say yes we now know
that's not true for most genes in fact
they're broken up into into sort of
little entities and they get um they get
stitched up together when they actually
uh perform their function um does one
gene have to specify a single function
no it can specify multiple functions
does one function have to have one gene
attached to it no one function can be
the product of many genes so there would
be disagreements around these kinds of
questions but the idea that a gene is a
specifies is a unit of information
however that information is used
subsequently in the physiology or the or
the anatomy or the body of the
individual would be generally agreed
upon and then again I mean you know the
book is lovely I enjoyed reading it
enormously uh it's historical in part
and we're not going to review and we'
got enough trouble right getting the
basic facts out we're not going to do
the history of it but can I to to give
you an analogy if we think about what an
electron is right so many of us will
remember the bore Atom from school which
was like a sun and planets model you had
the nucleus and the electrons whizzing
around it and nowadays we're thinking
quantum mechanics of fields of
probability so in contemporary physics
there's no way of describing uh an
electron as little ball that whizzes
around the bigger ball there's no balls
or something but the electron is the
same electron right you know through the
history of physics in the 20th century
21 there's still an electron it's the
same thing we just described it in
different terms has it been the same
thing this Gene through the recent
history of genetics or has our
understanding of what this thing is
changed in the last 00 years so the the
our understanding of the word Gene as a
unit of heredity has not changed good
that's important our understanding of
what a gene does how a gene acts how it
becomes functionally realized how it
intersects with other genes to produce
the complexities of human anatomy and
physiology that has changed and will
keep changing um you know the analogy
that I give to um is is to the word
encyclopedia right everyone here knows
what an encyclopedia is we know exactly
what an encyclopedia is we know what an
encyclopedia does for the younger among
it's like Wikipedia but it's written
down and yet if I were to ask you how an
encyclopedia Works how an encyclopedia
has is updated in time people would say
well that's been changing these days we
update encyclopedias in a different way
than we updated encyclopedias 20 years
ago in fact if you look under the entry
encyclopedia in encyclopedia that keeps
changing right because of that reason
right okay so there's a there's an
internal recursion about it genes are a
little bit like that we know what genes
are at a fundamental level we know that
they transmit hered information from
from cell to cell and from parent to
offspring but the exact way that the
information is encoded what exactly it
does keeps changing how much it engages
what it engages what keeps changing so a
simple way to think about it is you know
a generally speaking genes produce
messages um genes can be of have been
often likened to a kind of hard copy
they produce a soft copy of message
called RNA It's usually the only way
that a gene can exert its activity the
RNA itself has some functions but it
also produces uh as a consequence of uh
other biological processes produces a
thing called a protein proteins are the
basis of are the are the machines of
life um our hair is a particular color
because of a protein our noses are built
of proteins and interacting with other
molecules Etc so proteins are kind of
the workhorses of biological life genes
essentially produce the carry the code
to produce messages rnas which
ultimately produce proteins and this
sort of information cycle allows the
existence of the creation of the
maintenance of the building of then the
repair of human bodies so it's
interesting so I think we're getting the
sense that the gene is you know it's not
complete agreement between three genetic
in but you kind of agree what it is you
kind of agree what it Isa and it's we've
it's kind of meant the same thing for
quite a while let's say 100 and
something years and and in fact that 100
Years of course predates uh DNA yes
which we've all heard of so so weirdly
the thing of which genes are made yes
was discovered after we knew what they
were right if that makes sense so tell
us about how could that be how could we
have a thing which we didn't know what
it was made of and and you tell us about
that relationship if you like between
the DNA a very important question and
the gene it's it comprise it's a very
important question I'm going to talk
about it historically and then give an
analogy historically speaking it's very
very important to to to understand this
the gene was visualized in an AB as an
abstraction before anyone knew its
chemical or physical form because of
course you can see that traits or
features or characteristics are moving
between Generations so you share your
mom's nose or exactly even Aristotle
knew that that in fact there was
something about information that was
moving and he really thought about it as
information he was one of the first
people it's an astonishing idea that
Aristotle thought about um you know
there's a famous quote I think Max perut
said Aristotle should have been given
the Nobel prize for the discovery of
genes because cuz he really thought
about it in an informational way he
thought that there's got to be
information that's moving and he
recognized that occasionally that
information can go away and come back so
a grandparent could sub could transmit a
the risk of a disease to a grandchild
without the parent having that disease
apparently when you think about thatal
clock that that's cool yeah that's right
so if you think about that very
thoughtfully you've got to conclude that
it's indivisible because it didn't go
away with the mother or the parent it's
got something remained that acrossed
Generations two generations and then
propped up again or cropped again this
idea I mean this was recorded by
Aristotle so back way back in in in
history you clearly have the idea that
there's an indivisible characteristic
something information moving doesn't get
diluted doesn't get broken up doesn't
get sort of chopped up and it's moving
across Generations so by the way just to
be clear that's so important isn't it
because the indivisibility of the gene
which you said would be weird given that
it's made up of all these letters why
can't you but the fact that it get can
get passed on means that there's
something kind of UN about it that there
is something there something that is
transmitted hold so so and it was um and
you know it's one of the most
striking intellectuals of our time
striking Scholars of our time who failed
virtually all his exams gives us a lot
of Hope who failed all his exams was
this this monk uh working in a small
town in now the Czech Republic called in
Bruno named Gregor mendal began to study
systematically this idea what what is it
how is it that this characteristic moves
from one organism down one generation to
the next and Mendel's discovery which
was astonishing for its time was that
when he tracked it it really behaved in
this indivisible manner much like others
had hypothesized that it didn't get
broken up that when when when he watched
the movement through peas he could
almost abstract it as a particle as
something that was a physical particle
he didn't know what it was made of he
had no idea but think about put yourself
in mle's shoes for a second and this is
what I this is one of the things that I
particularly love to do think of
yourself you know you're a monk in an
augustinian Abbey you believe that God
made everything and you believe you're
forced to believe you like to believe
that this is how organisms arise
organisms arise because some kind of
seed is laid and the a kind of divine
decree allows you to sort of flower into
this into five hands and sorry five
fingers in each hand and we'll come on
to the modification thing later exactly
five hands would be very nice um so
there you
are and all of a sudden based on simple
experiments on pe's you begin to realize
that in fact information is
moving that things are not what they
appear in fact across every generation
the reason that the pea plant acquires a
purple flower versus a white flower is
because something has passed on almost
like a physical particle of information
and I I liken this in the book to kind
of a whisper someone has said to the
embryo you have got to produce a pink
flower or a purple flower versus a white
flower and that whisper that idea that
acum of information then moves on to the
next Generation in undivided so look I'm
going to do something really really
awful at this point which is I'm going
to sort of gymnastically leap over uh
Crick okay Jim Watson loved to Leap Frog
Watson um uh nod at rosin Franklin and
take it as red that we all know
um the structure beautifully rendered on
the screens around us the the double
helix and that's the DNA the four
letters that you talked about that in
code and before we get to the kind of
the questions that I think we all need
to be wrestling with and you certainly
argue we need to be wrestling with in
contempor study there are two little
bits of recent progress which I'd like
you to talk us through briefly yes um
one is this Gene editing thing or
crisper as it's known and I would like
you to do a little bit on epigenetics
for us because I think these are two
things which even those of us who
consider ourselves to be fairly well
versed in the gene thing would like a
little bit more on and then we'll to how
scared should we be what are we going to
do next uh and and so on so would you
mind giving us those two if you'd agree
thank you so chrisper or something if
you I will talk about three things
actually I'll just add to this the idea
of prenatal genetic diagnosis that would
be great okay so prenatal genetic
diagnosis crisper and epigenetic just so
you know where we're going guys once we
got those down we'll do the real okay so
you know what a gene is now
approximately it's carried in DNA this
molecule which thankfully was printed in
the right way there's a way that that
people often make a mistake to make it
left-handed um and this I think is
right-handed good job intelligence
Square for those of you on on the
podcast check out the slide online I
know you get a plus for that because
it's a terrible error to make it go the
other way around because molecules you
know like left hands and right hands
these are not superposable so anyway
this is the I think it's the right uh
it's the right direction okay it only
coils that way it doesn't coil this way
if that makes any sense to you anyway so
so if you were to think about that thing
that's up on the stage actually h
as a as as a gene it would be as I said
in DNA I would have actg cctg etc etc
coiled along its coils its opposite
strand the mirror image would be a
mirror image of that um in a different
different chemical form we don't need to
worry about that okay in that code would
be the code for one gene could code for
could interact with four other genes and
code for the shape of your nose
about seven genes on we now know
intersect with each other and
approximately have interact with the
environment and produce height they at
least seven or eight about 10 or 15
interact with each other and interact
with the environment and produce the
color of your skin and so forth some of
them are very unitary some of them only
one gene drives one feature or
appearance they're rare they're
generally rare most of the other ones
sort of talk to each other and act like
machines molecular machines that will
ultimately result in okay anatomy
physiology Etc okay so that's that's
step number one we know that now what
does crisper allow you to do crisper is
a molecular machine borrowed from the
bacterial World which allows you to go
into that DNA sequence that long stretch
of
acng and
switch deliberately switch one part of
the code and replace it potentially with
some additional modifications replace it
with a different code crisper is
actually a pair of scissors there's
nothing more fancy about it it's a pair
of scissors it's a pair of scissors that
recognizes one particular sequence in
the human genome and clips the human
genome or any genome it doesn't have to
be human Clips the human genome or any
genome at that sequence now remember
when I say one particular sequence what
I'm really thinking about is go back
again to your 66 full sets of the
encyclopedia Botanica what crisper does
is it scans all those 66 sets and
says on page
742 line
seven
par4 it reads A G GT I'm going to make a
cut in that line and then there are
natural processes in the human cells in
human cells which will try to replace
that information and when you replace
that information you can switch it to a
different kind of information so in
other words you could therefore go into
the 66 volume pick out Volume 7 go to
page
746 pick page line one and say I'm going
to replace act gcct for ACT T CCT that's
what chrisper allows you to do and just
two quick questions on chrisper and
we're going to have to go through this
quite fast because you know there's
there's like the future of humanity to
get to but you know on on the how
surprising is that so for you know you
know when somebody tells you a story and
you're not sure whether you should go oo
or not right so as a geneticist is that
really new and really cool like if
someone had told you 10 years ago that
was going to be possible would you
believe them we as geneticists as cancer
biologists we had been dreaming of this
technology for now six decades okay
people had been dreaming of a technology
that would allow you to basically go
into the human genome recognize one part
of it and change it and there was no one
had imagined that anywhere in the world
you would find this technology and it
was hidden it was hidden because and
I'll tell you it's a lovely story I'll
go through it quickly but it's really
worth knowing it was hidden because in
the bacterial world in the
microbiological world the competition
for survival is so stiff that bacteria
evolved he didn't know about it but
bacteria evolved a mechanism of
delivering lethal hits to viruses that
invade them and the way they deliver
these hits is to cut up the DNA of these
viruses and bacteria because of the
evolutionary pressures it had to be cut
up in one particular place otherwise
they would destroy themselves their own
DNA or they would destroy the wrong DNA
okay so basically bacteria evolved
unbeknownst to us this pair of molecular
scissors that would recognize as I said
one piece of DNA one sequence of DNA in
a in a long stretch and deliver a lethal
cut into it and we
suddenly understood this scientists
suddenly began to understand this and
began to realize that wait a second if
you readapt this if you engineer or
re-engineer this bacterial technology
you can suddenly produce Cuts or
mutations in the human genome
deliberately at will so again I'm trying
to give us the cast of characters that
we need for the drama that that you
argue that we feel we're playing out
right now that was not a drama from 10
years ago so we can now go in and at
will digitally as it were edit any
element of the much like you can pick
out a volume the encyclopedia chop up
one piece replace that word with a
different word character one now you
could say let me just finish up one more
thought it's helpful you could say well
who cares uhhuh but what if that
character was the difference between a
normal version of the braa one gene
brca1 Gene and the gene that causes
breast cancer if you know that if you
inherit copies two copies of that brca1
Gene your chance of getting breast
cancer in your lifetime was
80% that's where it begins to matter
what if that was that volume s page 19
was the sequence of the cystic fibrosis
gene or a gene that carried a 100%
chance of giving you Huntington's
disease all of a sudden this business of
editing the human genome rubbing out
actg and making it atg
becomes extremely consequential because
you're dictating the fate of a child an
unborn child potentially who has a risk
of breast cancer or Huntington's disease
and deciding that I'm going to erase
that and replace it with something new
keep that thought so then
preimplantation genetic diagnosis I
think has been around for a little while
you you look at the embryo before it's
implanted and you check it out and if
it's got certain things you don't want
then you don't put it in and if it
hasn't got none of the things you don't
want you do put it in roughly roughly
speaking so if you think of crisper as
writing because you're you're erasing
things and replacing it with new code so
you can write the human genome you can
think about pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis as reading the human genome
why is that make sense again going back
to our simple analogy you have your
encyclopedia and all of a sudden you
decide you know that again to press the
point in volume s there is a code that
tells you
atgc that tells you that your child will
have a heightened risk for breast cancer
and now instead of using crisper or any
other new fancy Technologies you say
what if I could detect that in a fetus
MH or in
a before a fetus is implanted and I just
won't implant that fetus I just read the
genome the entirety of the genome and I
say I just decided I'm going to not deci
I'm going to I'm going to decide not to
implant that genome that genome and
implantation is kind of in the context
of of uh artificial examination initro
fertilization but you could imagine
doing that potentially for a for a fetus
that was conceived naturally as well
that's right exactly so now with
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis you
can basically subtract information from
your lineage you could say that of all
the sets of encyclopedias that I could
potentially carry forward into the Next
Generation I'm going to choose only this
one and I'm going to eliminate all the
other ones and in doing so you would
eliminate certain words which were in
certain sets that does that make sense y
it's kind of obvious so it's a
subtractive technique crisper can
certainly be used to subtract you can
take information away you can rub it
away but it's also more powerfully an
additive technique you can add
information back to the genome we've
never had that ability really to do that
properly before they've been attempts to
do it so it's an added technique so
that's crisper pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis I'm loving the bit where we
get S Muki to do now uh epigenetics in
one and a half minutes
okay epigenetics is a layer of
information it's a very controversial
topic okay epigenetics is a layer of
information that is so the genome every
cell in your body inherits the same
genome give or take okay so in that
sense we think of the genome for an
individual kind of being fixed it's
there was this kind of swapping around
anything with the sperm and the Egg and
then you get your genome and that's your
genome and there you go that's right
yeah
however a red blood cell looks totally
different from a neuron if they were to
exchange their properties your body
would go mad right you would not have
any body so something must be telling
the genome to
use different genes in different
contexts and allow certain genes to be
activated in their neurons certain genes
to be activated in your blood cells etc
etc in the broadest sense epigenetics
refers to the idea
that human beings when they evolve when
they when cells arise from human beings
and they become acquire different
identities that different parts of the
human genomes are activated and
inactivated differently now how does
this happen it happens through a variety
of processes one thing the biggest thing
is particular proteins come and tell
genes in your brain cells to turn on
certain sets of genes and turn off other
sets of genes so that's probably the
biggest process that
happens other processes that are more
controversial that also happen is that
the genome once it's activated certain
genes and inactivated certain other
genes in your brain cell versus your
blood cells it also attaches chemical
tags or physical tags to the genome and
whether those impact or don't impact the
way that genes are changed in your is is
very controversial and controversial the
extent that you've actually I mean
you've got slammed for talking about
this in some ways and but controversy is
interesting again for those of us
outside the domain is that something
which people do argue about within it's
a huge argument why so much passion
there's a the consequence of that is
that people argue about where how genes
are regulated how are genes there's a
paper today that actually even addresses
this controversy it turns out that these
Master regulatory proteins so-called
transcription factors are not autonomous
we're learning about them more and more
every day yesterday there was a paper
which showed that if you eliminate those
if you just fiddle with those chemical
marks you can turn genes on and off
autonomously so there's a lot of passion
about this because so far we have not
been able to turn genes on and off in
certain cells at will that's why it
matters could you change a neuron into a
uh into a blood cell it's not so easy to
do even though they have exactly the
same genome could you turn a d
generating cell a cell that's dying into
a cell that comes alive and lives
forever not so easy to do they both have
the same genome so what makes the
difference between one and the other
well it's that layer of information
about the genome it's clear that these
Master regulatory proteins have a big
role in this the question is whether you
know these chemical tags and physical
tags have any role because in fact we
can toggle those much more easily okay
so look I want to do a quick gear change
now and and you know in my head it's the
fact of you're being a Pulitzer
prizewinning author is very interesting
to me and I'm someone also who's been
interested in straddling the divide that
we talk about the two cultures the Art
and Science thing and those of you that
will have heard of the two cultures will
probably know that it comes down to a BL
called CP snow uh who argued of these
two cultures and I think the way in our
society that's thought of is about
scientists and artists being different
hanging out in different clubs talking
in different ways but CP snow it turns
out wasn't too concerned with uh culture
in the sense that we talked about now
but he was involved in the immediate
postc World War period in the nuclear
age yes so he was very concerned about
Atomic power uh and nuclear weapons yes
and the concern that he had was that
politicians particularly and the public
not being scientifically literate would
make it impossible for them to make
decisions about the application in that
age of nuclear technology which was in
his view the biggest moral and ethical
concern of his age and could result in
the annihilation of our species
you write in your book about a letter
that Einstein produced to Roosevelt
where he said we have all the pieces
this was in before the bomb was made we
have all the pieces necessary to create
a bomb and and suggesting that ruselt
ought to sit up and take notice and I
wonder you know how exercised are you
about public knowledge of these domains
and and what are the things that you
think we should be worried about now
resulting from these recent advances in
technology that will affect us our
children you know and where decisions
need to be made by as it governments is
it the the UN don't know what give give
us a couple of vignettes if you would
the big issues right now let me begin
that with a question that it's a thought
experiment let let me begin that with a
question that I'm going to throw out to
the audience and I'm going to ask the
audience to think about let's say you
have um two
daughters and let's say we could
predict a with a 10%
chance the daughters are healthy they're
growing they're 11 and 6 years old and
let's say you could predict with a 10%
Fidelity in one daughter that she would
develop the risk of being schizophrenic
by the time she was 20 years
old they're perfectly fine now would it
change the way you think about your two
daughters right let's say I increase the
number to 50% the 50% chance that she
would develop some other illness lethal
but potential illness debilitating
illness by the time she was 20 or 30
would would it change the way you think
about your two
daughters yes now here's the second
question if it was 10% chance if it was
that 10% chance would you want to
know no yes no for those of you in
podcast World we've had some yeses and
some NOS from the audience if it was a
78% chance would you want to know yes
right this is the world that we are
going to
enter our children this will be one of
it may not be the most it will be one of
the most important questions that a
future generation will will be asking
itself our generation is already asking
itself you know why is it
that at 75% risk they're perfectly
healthy
now why is it at 75% risk you want to
know whereas at 10% risk you don't want
to know what is it about I mean the
answer is kind of obvious we you know
the risk increases we want to be sure
about the future but what makes that
difference can let me ask you let me ask
you a question what is the science or
the domain of inquiry that would answer
the question you just asked right so
you're a cancer doctor you're a
geneticist you're a writer but it
doesn't feel to me as if any of those
things I mean those things equip you to
understand them technically and in your
book and and in your life you talk about
your family your family history and
schiz Freer mental illness and so on but
but who is it who should be looking at
the question of when people want to know
these things understanding it better
helping to educate is that a question
for sociologist is it a question for
politicians is it a question for
anthropologists it's not a genetic
question well most importantly it's a
question for everyone um because if you
don't participate in that question
you'll miss out on your voice in that
question it's a question that we need to
ask you know it's a question that we
need to ask children with Down Syndrome
it's a question question that we need to
ask men and women who men who have and
men and women who carry the braa WAN
Gene it's a question we need to ask
people who read literature it's a
question we need to ask those who think
about what suffering means who is us
what normaly means what is where are we
going to draw the lines who's going to
put an arrow and say Huntington's
disease
suffering depth of of uh potential you
know grief and suffering here's a line
but um sexual orientation not to make
silly
comparisons not part of that debate
outside that debate but help us because
I mean you know the question of whether
you do paracetamol or Ibuprofen when
you've got a headache is you know it's a
question but it's not one where we
really feel we all ought to inform
ourselves and educate and so I quite
like to look up NHS
choices so what's the fundamental
difference do you think between these
kinds of question so this is a question
of paracetamol or ibuprofen is not a
question of who we are this is a
question that helps us Define who we are
how we will Define ourselves who are we
going to choose to be what is going to
be allowable who's going to be who's
going to allow the allowable um and if
you think that this is far away oh you
know this is abstraction who thinks
about all of this let me remind this
audience that in parts of India and
China this experiment is already unfold
in the experiment is already unfolded
there are 800 women to a th000 men
that's on the basis of genetic diagnosis
and selection it's not someone else's
problem this is about killing girl
children that's right and and so it's
not so and that is a that is a dysgenic
project it is the largest dis genic
project in human history what do dis
genic mean dis genenic means using I
mean it comes from the word Eugenics
which is to so-called better the human
population I I believe and I think most
people would believe in this in in this
country that this is dis genic in the
sense that it uses genetic Technologies
to produce populations that are not
ideal that was that that that reflect a
kind of a a perverse desire and if you
ask as I did in this book if you ask the
people um in some of you know who've
studied these cultures who studied these
areas if not across all of India is
actually quite focused on a particular
Northern edge of India they believe that
that bringing a a girl child into the
world represents for that child
extraordinary
suffering right they feel that she is
that she would undergo extraordinary
suffering and therefore that justifies
to them to limit that extraordinary
suffering now to this audience you would
say that sounds patently
perverse and yet these desires these
fantasies have already circulated around
the world more than once they' have
circulated around the world in the in
Europe in the UK where the term Eugenics
was born and they will I guarantee you
they will circulate around the world yet
again as Eugenics as the desire to
make children who do not suffer becomes
personalized a personalized variation of
eugenics using a combination of as I
said before genetic and potentially
epigenetic Technologies pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis and maybe crisper in
the future
now one more thing before we come out
and I mean I can you're kind of freaking
everyone out a little bit here with the
whole infan side thing and and and and
the disease stuff so let me ask you to
do uh a little bit on the positive side
if I may and I'm not being poly Anish
here so um you know you've talked about
diseases that you might or might not
want to know about and you've regarded
uh being a woman as as as Untold
suffering which must be avoided at all
costs um what are the kinds of things
which we might be looking to this
technology to allow us to do that are
better and
and every most of of the new vaccines
that you're getting are the result of
genetic Technologies not all of them but
many of the new vaccines that that
prevent
tremendously debilitating diseases
around the world are the product of new
genetic
Technologies um the idea that you could
eliminate um parasitic diseases by
changing the animals that carry
parasitic diseases mosquitoes for
instance is a genetic
technology most most of us who've
undergone therapy for breast cancer or
for leukemia or for lymphoma are
beneficiaries of genetic technology most
of us who've undergone screening for
breast cancer because there is a breast
cancer Gene in our family and thereby
caught early cancers are the children as
it were of genetic Technologies the idea
that you can diagnose cystic
fibrosis and potentially um prevent uh
um having decide not to have a child
even though you and your spouse May both
carry the one of the genes for Cystic
Fibrosis is the product of genetic
Technologies and pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis tast sax disease the
decision not to Bear a child and it's a
personal decision to have with Down
Syndrome it's a personal decision if you
had if you indulged in that decision if
you made that decision you've already
become part of this genetic technology
you know it's very raise your hands I'm
sorry this question raise your hands if
you have thought about or actually
performed an amnos synesis to look at
whether your child may or may not have
had Down syndrome or know
someone this we've already we've already
entered we have already entered for all
of you and your families you have
already entered the genetic age it's not
far away from you you've already entered
it it's inter in your book you you you
quote a
a description which I hadn't heard
before which I think is rather lovely
the chapter about through the Looking
Glass so the Alice in Wonderland thing
and I suppose you still sound to me as
if you're talking like a doctor because
the when I ask you for some positive
stuff you talk about all these diseases
we might not have anymore right
ultimately putting doctors out of
business but again before I come which
is you know it's a grim Prospect clearly
for you but the the um the the I I
wonder whether there are things outside
of disease and Medicine which we ought
to be thinking about in terms of
enhancement we jokingly referred to five
hands before is this the time to be
thinking about uh improving ourselves
Beyond simply the avoidance of pain and
disease in your view so that's an
important question it's not a great
question I've thought about the question
I find it hard for me again I'm doing my
best I've I've thought about it
obviously a lot it's hard for me to
imagine as a physician particular I me
know that's my practice my day-to-day
life I find it hard to imagine doing
that without violating certain things
that we know about human beings I mean
in other words what I'm trying to say is
that problems we have
enough that to imagine enhancement
Beyond problem seems to be a second
order question it would be a kind of 2.0
question um and I find it hard to
imagine that given what we know about
genes given what we fundamentally know
about genes that they don't usually act
as widget makers it's an important
distinction you know people used to
think in the 1950s maybe that genes were
widget makers you it was like a a
blueprint in other words that you had a
blueprint much like a blueprint you know
you read a blueprint and it says you
know 3 cm above the axle place a nut and
a screw and tighten it and when you made
your device 3 cm above the thing you
would place your nut in a screw and you
tighten it that's a
blueprint genes generally speaking are
more like recipes so in other words and
you finally bake a cake you can't say
well 3 cm above the
raisin on the far left hand corner there
was a specification for putting a second
raisin right clear not a fan of the
Great British Bake Off here but yeah
right so genes interact so in other
words the way a cake happens is that you
put a whole bunch of things together
they in a particular temperature in a
particular context and you end up
getting a process which is ultimately
results in a cake genes mostly behave
like that and because because of that
reason you can't say pluck the raisin
out of that and all of a sudden you'll
have everything else left the same
whereas you can do that with a widget
right so my fear is that if as far as
enhancement is concerned we know so
little right now about the developmental
Cascades of what results in a human
being that ultimately will end up
screwing up the recipe in more
fundamental ways and just to finish that
example we will say add one tenth of the
butter
to the cake as it were but you know that
if you add one tenen to the butter you
don't get a on tenen butter cake you get
no cake you get a collapsed mess right
and so that's the analogy helps us to
realize that process oriented things
that are developmental or
neurodevelopmental or biodevelopmental
Cascades it's generally harder to
intervene on them without having many
many unintended consequences we've seen
that happen before one very very final
question before we come to the floor and
that is you know so we're quite good I
think in this country human
fertilization embryology authori is I
think I understand to be well regarded
globally as a as a way in which we think
about these things as a society and
legal framework and what's allowed and
not allowed to do uh is is regulated in
that way and I believe you have similar
mechanisms in America what you can
publish in a journal Nature and Science
is regulated by certain ethical codes as
well not wishing to pick on China but I
mean you know in China for example are
they just pushing on and doing stuff
outside of that kind of frame work is
there an international Dimension to what
people are and aren't playing with right
now and does that frighten you strong
International Dimension and first of all
the Chinese have their own important
code it's not that they're working like
Rogues outside the code it's just that
their codes are not the same as ours
they don't hold I mean I talk about in
the book I if they don't hold the same
sanctity to they don't have the same
idea of sanctity they're different idea
it's not that they don't think the
sanctity at all it's said they didn't
have a different idea of sanctity of the
embryo and therefore certain things are
intervenable and certain things are not
intervenable the Chinese experiment that
was done which tried to
alter Human Genome in about 70 embryos
was actually done relatively carefully
these embryos were picked um and they
were picked for the Capa for the for the
fact that they wouldn't normally undergo
full development because of certain
abnormalities so it was actually
carefully done that said now that the
proof of principle has been done the
next natural step would be let's try it
in a real embryo with potentially a real
problem you know so let's take an embryo
potentially with a terrifying disease
like um you know one of these diseases
that causes hemophilia right and why
don't we correct that Gene so it's not
as if there is no code operational it's
that they're different codes operational
and they depend on the religious and
scientific cultures of these individual
places so we've got to have a common
code otherwise this will will become an
arms race people in the United States
are already worried that if we if
we give this away to places like China
and Korea and India and other places
where there are different moral codes
that um are acceptable then we will lose
the sarms race and it's too important uh
to to give away um so I think we need an
international dialogue if we need an
international dialogue we need the
vocabulary we need to understand why
it's important if you need the
vocabulary you need to read not don't
read my book but read the several books
about it so that you can then come to
the stage and say I understand where we
are I have an I I've put a stake down I
know what a gene is I know how easy or
complicated it is to alter them I know
what it means to alter them I I know the
history I know what has happened the
fantasies of altering genes in the past
I know those fantasies that are likely
to be
repeated therefore I conclude that these
are the boundaries that I will set for
us and for the world I was in the States
during the race where George W Bush was
running for president and he would came
out against uh stem cell research and
I've been campaigning for years that
science should be part of culture it
should be part of policy we discuss it I
remember complaining to a friend of mine
who was the political correspondent the
ABC about the fact that George W Bush
was against stem cile research he said
dude you can't have it both ways right
if you want it to be part of politics
then they may be ruling on in a way that
you don't agree with right you know so
like the fact that it's part of politics
means that it can be a political
decision that you don't agree with and I
you know you will give up control to the
politicians of the that's right but the
important thing is of course politicians
are us they're not them the minute we
think of themselves as them and US of
course we make we lose the fundamental
quality of what it means to have uh
representation very good politicians are
otherwise folks um uh questions comments
now we'll do it with microphones please
make yourselves visible in some way by
waving something we'll take them in
batches folks and also just it's not
necessarily the case that we will answer
in detail everything that's raised it's
as much to hear from you as to as ra
your conerns please if you have a
consultation the doctor is not in so
please do not bring your your your
personal or family medical problems to
the flo at this stage uh yes there's a
wave over there let's let's try that sir
hello um yep you're on is it working yep
uh Dr mukarji this is perhaps
tangentially related to the talk but as
soon to be parents my wife and I know of
um blood Cod stem cell storage companies
private companies that store stem cells
from the blood cord is this can you shed
some light on this I mean we' have done
our research in read but what do you
think of collecting stem cells of babies
from the blood cord okay I'm going to
I'm going to get you to buffer these
I'll try and make a note so blood cord
stem cell buffering uh over there
yes so good evening doctor um I just
wanted to say in the start of your book
you tell a very emotive tale about your
cousin money and for me that felt like
we were going beyond the imper IAL Realm
of the Gene and going towards the
metaphysics of what it can actually do
to us as a society so do you believe
with this you know fastpaced um
scientific discoveries that are
happening have we as you know moral
thinkers and soci uh um you know
philosophers and ethicists have we
keeping up with the discoveries that are
happening and if we don't will it have
negative implications on the future
thank you okay that's a nice question
well should we try one more if anyone up
that's on that side yeah go on let's get
some ladies in next sir
please yep um in your personal opinion
should we wipe out the enophiles
mosquito oh is that the what's that one
that's the one that's doing what uh Mia
and yeah yeah yeah also and wasps can we
get rid of wasps as well that would be
great I think that be yeah never know
okay so you you can take all or any of
those in any order you like um well let
me talk about the mosquito first I I'll
keep the stem question for later I'll
I'll answer the metaphysics question a
little bit so mosqu is an interesting
question um actually I have a
conversation with of all people Bill
Gates which is coming out you can find
it in YouTube maybe early next month he
reviewed the gene um and the mosquitoes
so I read a lot to prep for this
conversation um and as you know I I I
actually don't go conversation with Bill
Gates exctly ex I don't go into great
detail about GMOs in this book because
it would really requires a new book a
separate book and I think it's an
important book to write someone else
should write it but um um mosquitoes I'm
told I as I understand it particularly
the Niles is a very unique uh situation
where when ecologists and other
entomologists insect people have looked
to ask the question is the mosquito
useful um people have come up with the
answer no not really we find any use for
the mosquito it's not a keystone species
it's not required for the survival of
another species it is an unusual
situation where this animal has really
learned to
parasitize or I should say feed on um
mammals and um Carry forward um diseases
that are very devastating to um humans
and other animals so in in the unusual
case and I think it's a very unusual
case in the UN usual case of the
anopheles mosquito or perhaps even the
zika carrying um 0s egypti um would be
the rare circumstance where you could
make the case for genetically modifying
um organisms where and and not have a a
unintended impact on ecology so
widespread that we would never be able
to recover it you're familiar with the
onion the satirical newspaper has a
brilliant headline scientists announce
breakthrough that partially solves
problem created by previously announced
breakthrough
right and we know those part I to talk
about them in the book a little bit you
know no one thought that uh introducing
you know what harm would there be to for
a few rabbits to run around
Australia um you know would we really
care would be nice food for one people
some people once in a while etc etc I
can give you a thousand examples now
this is this has been studied um I would
say that there is a case to be made and
you know the devastation is enormous
malaria is enormous um as you know
there's a plan um and and one experiment
to do this for Adis egypti um in uh the
Caribbean and subsequently in the United
States so we will watch to see what
happens just to be clear with the
genetics of this one so as it were as a
gen so we could do it with like really
powerful um you know bug spray or
swatters or something but is there a
genetic solution to that you know does
this come under the kind of things that
give you PA cor worried about what that
in fact the there's some debate a lot a
lot of controversy about this in fact
you know I had a conversation with
people who are reading this until
recently there was not a lot of evidence
that bug sprays Etc spraying worked at
all okay in fact most of those were
negative so we if we've run out of those
kinds of solutions the genetic solution
would be to equip maybe the female or
the male mosquito it doesn't matter
depending on how you want to do it with
some Gene that basically renders their
offspring sterile um so that you would
basically have a dead lineage every time
that mosquito reproduce you'd release
these mosquitoes they're marked as you
know as you may know they're marked with
a jellyfish Gene that makes them glow
red um they're not visible normally but
under the microscope you can figure out
as the population is changing you could
trap them and watch the population
change uh you could give them you could
equip these mosquitoes with a little
extra drive so that they reproduce a
little bit faster and so forth um um and
this is a this is a people have very
very thoughtful people have thought
about exact doing exactly this to
eradicate malaria whether it works or
not is a question what its unintended
consequences are is a question M there
is a terrible disease Deni is I had Deni
I was in bed for 3 months it's a
terrible disease um so these are these
are not to be taken lightly you want to
do cold blood or you want to do
metaphysics I'll do metaphysics just
because I'll quick metaphysics and then
we'll do cold the the metaphysical
question so the question is roughly so
so it's about you know you so the book
it contains stories and you refer to
them obliquely in your remarks so far
about your own family and I think you
know one of the nice things about the
story this whole story is that it does
relate to all of us as individuals you
you begin through you're not there as a
cancer doctor you're not there as a
geneticist and I suppose in a sense the
issues that you raise do have resonance
for all of us in terms of how we think
about ourselves how we think about our
parents how we think about our childrens
how we think about static children what
you know is that what excites you about
the domain what what do you think we
need to be well I mean you know the the
if you look and as as someone who's
thought about this particularly with
with with my with my previous work etc
if you look it's almost always that
there is that that metaphysics and and
and technology in particular are in a
kind of cycle with each other um one
doesn't even exist without the other the
questions that are rais that were raised
once we began to have um
instruments um that resemble human
intelligence um are unique questions to
that moment you could have thought about
them beforehand but there would be
abstractions but all of a sudden you
know when we have that moment you
suddenly begin to realize that this
question has an important consequential
metaphysical Dimension and so it is with
James you know we people have thought
about for a while kind of abstractly
what it would mean to influence the
human genome people have written about
it great writers have written about it
Al suley um you know George Orwell
others have thought about this idea but
now all of a sudden it becomes a very
concrete reality and so therefore the
metaphysical challenges this
philosophical challenge is what do we do
who do who do we Define as normal how
who is there going to be a an appointed
body of individuals that says you know
that these forms of prenatal genetic
diagnosis and uh or implantation are
allowed those are not allowed these are
these ET you know who's going to be in
that is are you going to give um as I
said before the voice to someone who has
a potentially lethal genetic disease is
that person going to be represented and
is that going to be is that person going
to be represented adequately um in that
in that voice so these questions I think
are becoming more urgent as we discover
the frontiers of the technology I'm
afraid we don't have answers to these
questions right now the book tries to
give an answer by the way um I can talk
about that in a second um so you want to
move on to the next patch sure okay cool
um uh there's one up there I believe am
I right I'm thinking that someone was
you were waving just
randomly all right I can't see yeah yeah
I can so we got one here yeah good good
I thought he was raving for a reason hi
thank thank you for your your talk so
far it's been very Illuminating um you
spoke about Eugenics for for a little
while but I wanted to ask you what your
opinion is where you draw the line
because some genes such as CLE
salmia um which is an awful disease that
um affects a lot of people in
particularly Africa also confers
a
um protection against malaras and as
we've been talking about that's
um a big problem and so where do you
draw the line with which genes you would
go to um protect against and which you
wouldn't and how would you then go about
um informing or recommending a course of
treatment to a patient yeah very the
story of CLE cell disease and actually
it's in the book is is an informative
story because you could ask the question
well why on Earth do we have CLE cell
anemia and part of the answer which has
come out from a from evolutionary
scientists is that it turns out we think
now that having particularly having one
a or one gene of or carrying one variant
of that CLE cell Gene may protect you
from malaria um whereas having you
know of course it also sets your
children up for having the risk of the
disease so similarly people have asked
the question why is that why does a
cystic fibrosis mutation even resist in
human populations well again in that
case there's a thought that having one
one Al of that cystic fibrosis Gene when
you have two of them of course you have
the disease but having one protects
against lethal infections of chera and
other kinds of abdominal it's nice work
in answering this question I do think
the question has posed it in an
interesting way so she said you decide
and then she referred to you as a
clinician or would you recommend as a
course of treatment but I think this is
tricky right so what you've done is
you've answered with uh just so story Ro
two Just So Stories in a row and
depending on how convincing we find
those Just So Stories about whether
there a good mutation or bad mutation we
might consider exercising it or not is
this really a satisfactory procedure for
deciding the things that we are or
aren't going to do with this technology
no I think the more satisfactory
procedure for dealing with this
technology is to ask the question do we
need to make a a um germ line so I have
have to explain two words that are
relevant here there are two ways to
alter genes one one way to alter genes
is to alter them such that you change
them in the sperm and eggs and therefore
it becomes permanently imprinted in the
human genome and every generation
thereby to come in the future will carry
that genetic change that's called
germline Gene changes whatever it might
be another way to change the human
genome is to say okay I'm not going to
do this in the galine I'm only going to
affect the cells that are affected so in
Sickle Cell it would just be the blood
cells that are affected so in fact if
you were to think about it for dis
diseases like CLE cell the much much
simpler solution technically
technologically and perhaps even
ethically is to say that we're going to
make the change in the blood cells alone
you have the luxury of doing that in
that particular disease in CLE cell
anemia and I'm going to concentrate my
efforts I'm going to largely concentrate
my efforts on changing blood cells so
that the patient with CLE cell anemia
now carries CLE cell anemia as it were
in his or her body except in the cells
that are most severely affected and
that's in blood now you could say well
that's a weasy solution well it's we in
s that you're limiting the the
consequences of the decision but you're
not addressing the question of which
things you would do and which things you
wouldn't do in the first place that's
right but it's important to recognize
that these these weasy Solutions are
probably the most practical Solutions so
that's what we would do first that's
what I think we should do first the
second question should we eliminate the
CLE cell Gene the mutant CLE cell Gene
completely so from from the human genome
I don't know the answer I don't know the
the the in the book uh the what I do
describe what we know historically is
that there's a kind of triangle as it
were um of forces that have allowed us
to make these decisions and it's
important to note the the Realms of that
triangle one is that the disease should
cause extraordinary suffering in the in
in being inherited through the germ line
now you could say well your definition
of extraordinary suffering is not the
same as mine and absolutely it's not the
same as mine it's changing all the time
but at least the standard is the
suffering should be extraordinary that
there should be something to tell us
that what the consequence of having that
gene causes a a a a a massive disruption
of what we would consider a normal human
life yep so that's one you don't mean
being born female right that's right so
number two that that we understand as
clearly as we can is we can possibly can
that actually changing that Gene will
have a one toone relationship with what
ultimately happens and not affect the
whole right so that we don't have all
these potentially unintended
consequences of eliminating malaria and
finding that something awful has
happened as a consequence of that so we
have and one way of saying this is also
to say that these that the penetrants
our understanding that the gene will
actually exert its effects in a oneto
one manner is very high number two and
number three is that we know from the
history now I'm talking more
historically as opposed to about
logically that we know that mandating
any of these choices is a terrible idea
particularly mandating it from the state
when States mandate this they make
terrible choices so it's generally
better to leave these decisions to
individuals they may choose or not
choose to have um a child with a with a
potentially devastating medical
condition they may choose to have that
child but mandating it at any point of
time is is so so this is a generally
safe triangle um with sickle cell
disease we have other Solutions we have
other potential so it doesn't really fit
in that triangle as it work very good um
yeah for some way there I'll take a
batch more so if there any others we'll
go yes sir or whoever it is where are
you oh hello so do you think doctors
should be The Gatekeepers to the human
genome because there are commercial um
Human Genome kits where you can kind of
carry out a test on yourself and it
gives you results which may not be
accurate but given that it is your own
information shouldn't you have access to
it without someone else yeah should
doctors be Gatekeepers like that over
there Hi um hi Dr M um I was just
wondering where you think the future of
genetics is going in terms of
microbiology because I know that so far
it's it's seen as less powerful to
actually go ahead and kill bacteria but
more powerful to inactivate genes that
cause virulence and I was just wondering
if you think this is something that the
bacteria would eventually evade or if
there's a future for it so yeah so
you're going to put the microbiologist
out of business and and I'm delighted so
another view from the gods yes all right
so basically you've been talking about
how crisper and using the genome can be
used to eradicate disease but what do
you think about producing like designer
babies if a consumer wants to create
their child to have say a FAS metabolism
so they can't be as fat you know or
change their eye color or hair color
should that be allowed or should you
kind of keep a lock on that because then
it could be a slippery slope and so
should we park microbiology we want to
do that one quickly um let's come to
microbiology later because these two
these two are kind of related so should
you guys be The Gatekeepers should you
know who here's done who here's sent off
for a genetic test out of Interest Who
if you've sent off for 23 and me or one
of them online other products do exist
uh put your hands up so wow we got like
less than 10% have you well you didn't
need to because you're in a actually I
decided not to okay cool all right so
should we have access to it and should
we be um modifying so the quick answer
is that right now these Technologies
especially the sequencing technology is
easy that's the easy part reading act
GCT TTC is very easy um it's how much it
cost right now I mean if in your lab to
if you want to send one off so if I want
to do the entire human the active part
of the human genome it's about
$1,200 $1,200 yeah 23 and me has does
some sub parts of it for even cheaper
etc etc you give or take yeah um the
first genome by the way cost about 3
billion the full
genome that's even fostter than Moors
law isn't it in terms of the reduction
exactly right so okay so that's the the
background the problem is not that the
problem is not sequencing getting
sequence is easy the analogy is you know
if you you put your child and you put
them in front of a book right and at age
three that child can say that's a letter
A that's a letter C that's a letter Q
etc etc etc they would have not one bit
of understanding of what those sequence
of letters meant they wouldn't know
therefore what the plot of the book was
what the moral of the story is what the
lesson is and what the historical
context of interpreting that lesson is
so we are sort of like the children who
are reading a in in our case A and G and
occasionally we can make out this
combination of letters means that but
that our vocabulary for that has about
six or seven words and there's a big you
know there's King there's Richard III
sitting in front of us so you can read
the word that you can read the word King
you can read the word you know clown and
now you're asked to say to yourself do
you understand the significance of this
play right that's where most of the
technology is sitting right now it's
it's at the toolkit stage so for me in
particular and I have a very a great
incentive to do this I wanted to know um
is there a risk for me or for my
children to have an increased risk of a
of of mental illness um it just wasn't
there we don't know what that will be
and I chances are it will be when we
come to it it'll be probabilistic it'll
be that kind of situation 10% risk 12%
risk it has to do something with the
environment some component of the
environment has to be sort of factored
in as well so so you advise people not
to use these I mean you know whatever
you're not going to tell you what to do
but you you think it should still come
be coming through a medical gatekeeper I
think it should be I think that it
should be done preferably on a trial
basis it should be done in a way that
information is recorded and sent back so
in a way it's useful it doesn't become a
kind of free-for-all I think the
information is helpful when you do have
a notable family history of a disease
that's when it becomes useful but in in
my case with most chronic diseases
whether you know that there's not one
Gene and the genes haven't been
identified for me right Now does not is
not useful at this point of time and
just say Ian shouldn't you know can't we
have a blueeyed one darling go on let's
just a little little go on just for a
change so let me tell you where my where
where I think the the trajectory or the
vector of my fear is I think the first
thing that will happen is
height I think height because of the
nature of the genetics I think the first
thing that people will try to uh to do
through prenatal genetic diagnosis I'm
afraid will be to parse out the six or
seven or eight genes we know that there
about eight or nine of them which have
strong influences on height and they
will try to influence them and I suspect
that they will try to influence them in
cultures where there's a premium placed
on taller individuals um so okay so
that's a speculation but this gives this
makes you worried or this is just you're
going to invest in the company that
cracks the hygin you no I think it makes
me um if I were Napoleon I'd be very
worried I wouldn't I would cease to
exist yeah it makes me very worried uh
it makes me very worried because it
creates a culture of normalizing it
creates a culture of of homogenizing it
takes it it perverts um the idea of
human potential it says that human
potential lives in certain inherited
features which we have spent a vast
amount of our culture trying to resist
we have spent Decades of our culture uh
trying to
precisely negate and resist that idea
that your potential lives infinitely in
some kind of aspect of your physical
appearance within bounds I think it's a
very it would be a very worrisome
phenomenon and this is why you whether
you're tall or short whether you are
female or male whether you know what
whatever however you wherever you come
from need to be part of that
conversation because if you're not then
someone will say look we have this
company what what wrong are we doing you
know what's a little bit of height
between
friends um pleas you come you come
across quite um in contemporary politics
quite Nanny statey right I mean you you
do think that this stuff should be
regulated and controlled or moderated in
some Central Way right I mean that's
that's that's what if that's the
definition of a nanny State then yes um
you know if it's the definition of a
nanny state that we should not be making
viruses carrying human enogen yes that's
the Nan state that I want
absolutely but but that is a that is
that is not the standard definition of a
of a nan state in other words the if if
the definition of a nanny state is to
help us police and understand the outer
limits of dangerous biological
interventions that have the capacity to
erode our culture that we have spent so
much time investing and creating sure
that's the 90 State I want very good uh
anymore from anymore
uh maybe one last question a little more
time I don't
know stem cell banking yes they want you
to answer the stem cell banking question
you know it's a it's a it's a it's a
slightly difficult question to ask
because we don't know what the potential
of these stem cells is for the future so
give us for those of us that don't know
why would anyone want to consider
banking the embryonic stem cells from
the so they're not embryonic stem cells
they're blood stem cells they blood stem
cells that
Bank uh potentially you could um make
other kinds of stem cells out of them
they have a relatively limited use right
now they're used in transplantation If
the child would get the rare on a rare
occasion would get a leukemia it would
get a blood stem cell cancer
occasionally if they would have a cancer
that would require severe chemotherapy
if you feel as if you know you have you
you are at that level of risk aversion
for your child I would say do that
banking but really realize that right
now the technology really is limited to
the use of these cells for the
transplantation of children that have um
life-threatening leukemic diseases which
is a small number of cases very very
rare disease in children very good we're
in the middle there and then we'll come
to the front yes ma'am so good evening
my question is sort of medical half
ethical um we have a friend who is in
the middle of a Huntington's discussion
yes now obviously that is binary you
either do or don't what do you mean what
is binary is that is are tested or not
tested no if your test you either have
it the gene or you don't yes okay so the
problem is if they are tested they then
have to report it from an insurance
point of view okay so there is no
motivation to actually ask the question
now does at what point in terms of the
genetic research do I not want to know
because it is going to potentially
affect my access to Medical Care later
on in life that's a very
question and I'm going to yeah we'll go
we'll go straight on that one yeah go so
so so right now as you know um in the
United States if you get tested outside
if you're not asked to be tested your
decision to reveal that information is
your is a private decision in fact even
if you were to be tested for braa one or
brca 1 Etc your decision not to reveal
or reveal that information is a private
decision and if we are to continue our
current Insurance system and there's a
big if there we can talk about that
separately it seems to me that that
decision should be left private
otherwise we will divide the world into
different Medical classes and the whole
point of insurance will begin to
collapse the whole point of insurance is
to combine risk in a way that allows you
to combine risk before information is
available combine risk or pool risk such
that if you were in a people who read
roles uh would be familiar with this
that the whole point of insurance occurs
before the veil or or while the veil of
ignorance still exists so if we all knew
when we were going to die there would be
no market for life that's right if we
all knew exactly when we were going to
die we would we would not have any
mechanism of having life insurance
because of course you would know when
and the premiums would change based on
that now the other question that you
could be asking and you have asked
implicitly in your question is does the
new form of understanding genetics Force
us to rethink
Insurance should the person with
Huntington disease be pulled with
someone else who has another lethal
disease or someone else who has hunus
disease that's a decision that genetics
will never solve for you it will only
give you information about what the
relative life expectancy or risk is for
an individual um individual who has that
illness or disease the questions of how
we choose to ensure each other is a
question that comes from social uh
contract building and social contract
building is a decision that is a
political and humanistic decision we
have decided to build social contracts
around things like Insurance because we
believe at a fundamental level that all
human beings come with a uh a level
playing Ground of risk and that should
one acquire greater risk than the pool
of monies that enter that that pool
should be deployed to help you through
that period of risk I'm loving the idea
of life insurance as being the bit we
know we're getting metaphysical when it
comes down to life insurance sure so the
question that I would pull pull out is
that as we get deeper and deeper medical
information and this is actually very
relevant question the gene apoe4 for
instance has a power has powerful risks
associated with it for disease should we
should the insurance companies be asked
to then divide human beings into two
classes of those that carry the Gene and
don't carry the Gene and therefore have
two different premiums attached to it
that would overturn the way we've
thought about insurance for the history
of insurance can I ask you a really
trivial question which just occurs to me
what was the name of the gene that you
just said apoe4 how are these names
chosen what do they even mean is there
some committee somewhere because like
with hurricans they you know there's
this they've got Hurrican George and
Matthew about to hit Haiti who names
these things and what do they even mean
well biologists name them based on their
function you know um
um is there a committee there is no
committee there is no committee right
now you get to name you get to name them
if you discover them have you named any
uh have I named a Jee no I have renamed
a I have renamed a Jee I found we have
found uh theb lab has found novel
functions to genes that already had
names which would bely their names in
fact they're the opposite of their names
uh so now you've been called John but I
just think Matthew is a much better
name generally of course we try to stick
to vention and try to um try to respect
the first person who named the gene who
may or may not have been right you know
the genes are often named for absurd
reasons um uh you know brca braa one or
brca1 was named because of It's
associated with breast cancer breast
cancer brca knew that okay cool um other
genes are named you know hunting to
disease is named because it is related
to that hunting disease Gene um you know
the gene that causes that metabolize
cholesterol has a funny name HMG Co a um
funny and peculiar or funny haha no not
funny haha are there any yeah the
genetics jokes all right
ma'am
yes hi thanks for your talk so uh as you
said in the US genetic screening is
getting cheaper then you have all the
director consumer Genting testing
companies so you send your saliva they
send you all
these all the all the serious diseases
cancer predisposition and so on so is
this information overwhelming or
empowering and also which are the
implications when a private company
technically owns your genetic
information um going back to the
insurance companies well in Canada there
is no law uh to prevent genetic
discrimination so what happens when a
private company owns it yeah so um right
say in history I mean just to to give
the historical context this thing has
been this question has been very alive
from the beginning of the Human Genome
Project has it when there was a battle
around that give you pause so you know
who who owns that information the answer
is well um and what happens when private
companies own the information the the
answer of course is that you know
companies like 23 and me have have been
very uh with great alacrity have have
told their consumers that the
information will never be released that
they are under no obligation whatsoever
to release it to an insurance so in
other words you you're an insurance
company your blue cross B Shield you
cannot call up 23 and me and say can you
tell me whether you have happened to
have a mutation in brca 1 or brca 2 you
cannot do that 23m has no obligation and
if if it were to be asked um it will
fight a legal battle and it will win
that legal battle as far as we can never
mind hacking iCloud for nude photos
let's hack the gene companies and work
out with so that has actually been
raised that question has been raised
what if they get hacked yeah um and now
start releasing information and that
information becomes public it's an
important concern I mean you're hacking
Yahoo you can certainly hack any of the
servers there have been now all sorts of
new mechanisms most of these private the
consumer companies have new mechanisms
to to um anonymize and so that you can't
just decode and attach it you know as
you know these can be broken they do
yeah yeah they they can be broken and
have been broken by other companies in
the past it's a new moral sphere
um that we don't know how to how to deal
with
um look in principle do I have a problem
with private companies owning genetic
information no if it's secure if it's
anonymized if it's carefully curated no
the question is that this information
right now is still in a read readability
phase we're still learning how to read
it um for the most part you know you get
information about certain disease risks
you get very good information about
ancestry if you're interested in
ancestry that's a great use if you're
dying to know what your ancestry is
that's a great use in terms of
predicting future risk of disease um
from your genome even the most advanced
um genetic centers are struggling to do
this for reasons we we told you already
number one is usually most human gen
diseases are not the product of one gene
but many genes and number two there's a
rich role of environment and chance
Interac or intersecting with Gen that
governs these kinds of um decisions
ultimately so I think the the chance
that from a privately owned company that
you will suddenly get information that's
valuable to your future health not to
your ancestry Still Remains in its real
infancy come back in 10 years and tell
us more come back in 10 years and you
know it depends on data right depends on
data if you if a million genomes were
collected and you could have the
capacity to now look through it's it's
it's a numbers problem you know more
means more the more you collect the more
you learn the more you collect the more
you learn so there's a little bit of a
feed forward quality to this so if a
million genomes were to be pulled I
think we would start getting more
information real information about risk
very good so look I'm delighted to say
this say it's going to be signing books
in the fo outside afterwards my name is
Daniel Glazer please do look us up at
science Gallery London and in the
meantime join with me and thanking our
speakers s m very much thank you thank a
lot thank thank you